1. Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
2. Current Opinion in
Systems Biology
3. Synthetic gene circuits and cellular decision-making in
human pluripotent stem cells [CELL_TYPE]
Laura Prochazka1,2,3, Yaakov Benenson4 and
Peter W. Zandstra1,2,3,5,6
4. Abstract
Precise manipulation of human cell fate is a long-standing
goal in biological engineering; it underpins efforts to advance
new cellular therapeutics, and to develop disease models for
fundamental research. Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC)
are emerging as the cells of choice for many of these appli-
cations. Currently, most advanced methods for manipulation of
hPSC fate involve recapitulating developmental processes by
mimicking stem cell niche-associated signals. Alternately,
advances in engineering synthetic decision-making gene cir-
cuits provide an approach in which cell fate is directly
controlled at the gene expression level. Here, we make the
case that integrating these two engineering approaches rep-
resents an exciting opportunity to advance our fundamental
understanding of cell fate control, and to accelerate new en-
gineering strategies to manipulate cellular behavior for
therapy.
5. Addresses
1 Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of
Toronto [LOCATION], Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G9, Canada
2 Medicine by Design, a Canada First Research Excellence Program at
the University of Toronto [LOCATION], Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G9, Canada
3 Terrence Donnelly Centre for Cellular & Biomolecular Research,
University of Toronto [LOCATION], Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada
4 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich [LOCATION],
Mattenstrasse 26, 4058 Basel, Switzerland
5 Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry,
University of Toronto [LOCATION], Toronto, Ontario M5S 3ES, Canada
6 School of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Applied Science and
Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia [LOCATION], Vancouver, BC V6T
1Z4, Canada
6. Corresponding authors: Zandstra, Peter W, School of Biomedical
Engineering, Faculty of Applied Science and Faculty of Medicine,
2222 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada. (peter.
zandstra@ubc.ca); Benenson, Yaakov (kobi.benenson@bsse.ethz.ch)
7. Current Opinion in Systems Biology 2017, 5:93–103
8. This review comes from a themed issue on Development and
differentiation (2017)
9. Edited by Philip Greulich and Ben MacArthur
10. For a complete overview see the Issue and the Editorial
11. Available online 21 September 2017
12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coisb.2017.09.003
13. 2452-3100/Crown Copyright © 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is
an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
14. Introduction
During embryonic development, cellular decision-making
yields remarkably ordered processes such as patterning,
morphogenesis and organogenesis that ultimately trans-
form a single zygote into a complex organism [1e3]. One
of the key players in early development are pluripotent
stem cells (PSC), transient cells that form at the blasto-
cyst[CELL_TYPE] stage and give rise to the three germ layers that
subsequently specialize into the various tissues forming
the body [4]. Differentiation of PSC in vivo happens as
discrete sequential cellular decision events with associ-
ated changes in gene expression patterns controlled by
gene regulatory networks (GRN) [5,6]. The precision of
these events is remarkable considering that the GRN
respond to and integrate multiple noisy [7] and often
conﬂicting cues. In 1998 the ﬁrst report of successful
in vitro culture of hPSC was published, demonstrating that
human embryonic stem cells (hESC) could be isolated
from the inner cell mass (ICM) of blastocyst-stage em-
bryos and stably cultured in the presence of develop-
mentally appropriate signals [8]. Interestingly, about 10
years later, the de novo generation of hESC-like cells from
ﬁbroblasts[CELL_TYPE] was reported [9]. These reprogrammed cells,
called induced PSC (iPSC), were generated by intro-
ducing components of the hESC GRN into cell popula-
tions in vitro. The generation of hESC by mimicking the
in vivo niche in vitro, and the generation of iPSC by arti-
ﬁcially manipulating a differentiated cells’ GRN, are two
signiﬁcant scientiﬁc achievements that lay the foundation
for more advanced approaches to manipulate human stem
cell fate and with this the idea to use stem cells as a
renewable source of human cells to generate cellular
therapeutics [10] and to model development and disease
[11]. Certainly, unlocking this potential requires tech-
nologies for robust and scalable production of hPSC and
hPSC-derived cell types in vitro. Thus, a long standing
goal of stem cell bioengineering [12] has been to develop
advanced strategies to mimic the developmental niche to
manipulate cell
fate by exposing cells to carefully
controlled environments [10,13,14]. As applied to hPSC,
this approach aims to produce cell types that are pheno-
typically and functionally similar to their in vivo equiva-
lents by guiding cells through developmental decisions
using exogenously provided and controlled signals; an
approach deﬁned here as “reverse engineering”[METHOD].
15. www.sciencedirect.com
16. Current Opinion in Systems Biology 2017, 5:93–103
17. 94 Development and differentiation (2017)
18. Interestingly, the concept of controlling cellular fate
decisions also resonates with the ﬁeld of synthetic
biology. One of the often articulated aims of synthetic
biology, is the generation of bespoke or “synthetic” cells
augmented with novel functionalities by rationally en-
gineering synthetic gene circuits using a well charac-
terized chassis cell
line as a foundation [15,16].
Synthetic gene circuits[METHOD] are small networks of interacting
genes designed to perform a deﬁned function inside
single cells. To create these gene circuits, synthetic
biology typically relies on well-characterized building
blocks, bottom-up assembly and predictive modeling
and prototyping, approaches here termed as “forward
engineering”.
19. Although stem cell bioengineering (by reverse engi-
neering the developmental niche) and synthetic biology
(by forward engineering synthetic gene circuits) use
inherently different engineering approaches, both dis-
ciplines share the goal of predictably and efﬁciently
controlling (human) cells in a proscriptive manner to
enable new applications. In this review, we summarize
some opportunities and limitations of these strategies
and argue that signiﬁcant synergies may emerge from
their integrated use.
20. Stem cell bioengineering: reverse
engineering[METHOD] of developmental processes
Typically, stem cell bioengineering aims to mimic, or
“reverse engineer”, the in vivo developmental niche to
guide cells toward functional specialized cell types [13]
and more recently toward tissues [17] and organoids
[18]. Engineering the hPSC niche involves the co-
culture with components such as ECM[MATERIAL], other niche
cells (or feeder cells), soluble factors (such as growth
factors or cytokines[MATERIAL]) and immobilized factors (such as
ligands or protein components of the ECM). Addition-
ally, physicochemical factors that inﬂuence the cell state
such as CO2, pH and temperature are tightly controlled
(Figure 1a, left) [14,19]. The biological components can
be of natural or synthetic nature and are mobilized in
hopes of simulating signaling events occurring during
development. This means the niche components have
and
to mimic
biochemical (paracrine- and autocrine signaling) in-
teractions. These interactions usually directly inﬂuence
the GRN and the associated decision-making tasks
(Figure 1a, right).
